# Upgrade guide for Scheduler v4.2.0

## EventDragCreate

The `EventDragCreate` feature now operates on a live instance of a new `EventModel` which is in the `EventStore` on a 
provisional basis until either confirmed or cancelled by the `EventEdit` UI.

The end times are manipulated live, and the UI performs appropriate updates. This is in contrast to having a proxy 
element dragged in place where an event *may* be placed if inserted.

If you have your own implementation of an event editor that is shown when drag create ends, this change might affect
its behaviour. If you need to know if the event being edited is the result of a drag create operation (or a double 
click on the timeline), you can inspect the new `isCreating` flag of the event record.

The `newEventRecord` param of the `dragCreateEnd` event fired by Scheduler was renamed to `eventRecord` and will be removed in 5.0.

## Dependencies can now be created by dropping anywhere on the event bar element

In previous versions you had to hit a specific side circle element to define it. The new behavior allows you to
setup a dependency by dropping anywhere on the task bar. This creates a dependency with the default type, as
defined by the `defaultValue` of the DependencyModel `type` field.

If you prefer the old behavior, simply set `allowDropOnEventBar` to `false` on the feature config:

```javascript
const scheduler = new Scheduler({
    features : {
        dependencies : {
            allowDropOnEventBar : false
        }
    }
});
```


<p class="last-modified">Last modified on 2022-05-30 6:38:16</p>