# What's new in Calendar v4.0.0

Be sure to also check out the news in [Grid](#Grid/guides/upgrades/4.0.0.md) and
[Scheduler](#Scheduler/guides/upgrades/4.0.0.md).

## Version in line with other Bryntum products

The version of Calendar was bumped from 1.0 -> 4.0 to bring it in line with Grid, Scheduler, Scheduler Pro and Gantt.
This will make it easier to determine which versions are compatible with each other.

## Dropped support for Edge 18 and older

We are not actively removing the fixes we have in place yet, but moving forward we will no longer add new fixes for
versions of Edge <= 18. If you are using an old version of Edge, we strongly encourage you to update to a new blink
based version.

### New `calendar.lite.umd.js` version to use with Angular

Bryntum Calendar is delivered with a new UMD package without polyfills. This was done to avoid conflicts with any
external Promise polyfills, such as `ZoneAwarePromise` from `zone.js` for Angular applications. It fixes this runtime
error:

```shell
Zone.js has detected that ZoneAwarePromise (window|global).Promise has been overwritten.
Most likely cause is that a Promise polyfill has been loaded after Zone.js 
(Polyfilling Promise api is not necessary when zone.js is loaded. If you must load one, do so before loading zone.js.)
```

We recommend that all your Angular applications should be upgraded to use the new `calendar.lite.umd.js` bundle. Also,
there should be no polyfills imported in `app/src/polyfills.ts` after `import 'zone.js/dist/zone';`. We have updated all
our Angular examples to use this new bundle. Make sure to update all usages of `calendar.umd.js`
to `calendar.lite.umd.js` within your application to avoid `Bundle included twice` runtime error.

**Old code:**

```javascript
import { Calendar, EventModel, EventStore } from 'bryntum-calendar/calendar.umd.js';
```

**New code:**

```javascript
import { Calendar, EventModel, EventStore } from 'bryntum-calendar/calendar.lite.umd.js';
```

## Event selection and keyboard navigation

Basic support for selecting events using the mouse and keyboard navigation by tabbing between events was added. When
navigating using the keyboard, the active event is clearly outlined.

## Exporting events to iCal

Calendar can now export individual events in `.ics` format. The downloaded file can be imported into any calendar
software supporting the standard, such as Google Calendar, Outlook, Apple Calendar and many more. For more information
please see `TimeSpan#exportToICS()` in the API docs.

## Load on demand

Calendar now triggers a `dateRangeChange` event before a view displays events for a new range of dates. By listening to
that event you can for example load events on demand or update some other linked part of the UI you might have
implemented.

For the load on demand scenario, there is a new feature called `LoadOnDemand` that assists with this if you are
using `CrudManger` to load your data. It will append start and end dates of the date range to the server requests made,
allowing you to easily return events inside the currently viewed range.

## Changed event triggering timing

The stores that are part of the project (EventStore, ResourceStore) has had the timing of their event triggering for
certain events modified. The change was made to assure async date calculations are finished when the event is triggered.
This affects the following events:

* `add`
* `remove`
* `removeAll`
* `change`
* `refresh`

Consider the following scenario:

```javascript
const calendar = new Calendar({
    events : [/*...*/],

    listeners : {
        add({ records }) {
            console.assert(records[0].endDate)
        }
    }
});

calendar.eventStore.add({ startDate : '2020-09-09', duration : 1 });
```

Without the change, the `add` event would be triggered immediately on the call to `add()`. Since date calculations are
now async (as described in section "Async date manipulation" above), the `endDate` would not yet be available.

With the change, the event is triggered after calculations has finished, making `endDate` available in the listener.

It is still possible to catch the events at the earlier stage, in case you do not care about waiting for data to be in a
calculated state. To achieve that, listen for `addBeforeCommit`, `removeBeforeCommit` and so on instead.

## WidgetHelper and BryntumWidgetAdapter

Registration of Widget classes for subsequent resolution through the `type` property of config objects has been
simplified. The "Adapter" concept has been removed. Widget classes now register themselves with the `Widget` base class
which is where they can also be looked up. When creating a custom widget, implement the `static get type` property to
return the type name. And at the end simply call `MyWidgetClass.initClass()` to have the new Widget class register
itself.

**Old code:**

```javascript
class MyWidget extends Widget {

}

BryntumWidgetAdapterRegister.register('mywidget', MyWidget);

```

**New code:**

```javascript
class MyWidget extends Widget {
    static get type() {
        return 'mywidget';
    }
}

MyWidget.initClass();
```

Fewer widgets are auto imported with the removal of the Adapter which imported a base set of Widgets. This means that
when not using a bundle, application code must import the widgets it uses. It also means that custom builds may be
smaller by including only what is used.

If your code previously had:

```javascript
import 'lib/Core/adapter/widget/BryntumWidgetAdapter.js';
import WidgetHelper from 'lib/Core/helper/WidgetHelper.js';

WidgetHelper.append([
    {
        type : 'button',
        text : 'Click'
    }
], /*...*/);
```

It should now instead not import the adapter, and instead directly import the button:

```javascript
import WidgetHelper from 'lib/Core/helper/WidgetHelper.js';
import 'lib/Core/widget/Button.js';

WidgetHelper.append([
    {
        type : 'button',
        text : 'Click'
    }
], /*...*/);
```

## Model Field Inheritance

Fields defined in a derived class Model that coincide by name with a field declared in a super class will now only
override those field config properties specified by the derived class. This allows derived classes to adjust a field
definition in one way, say to change the default value and still inherit other field properties, such as a convert
function.

For example:

```javascript
    class ModelOne extends Model {
    static get fields() {
        return [
            { name : 'barcode', convert : v => String(v) }
        ];
    }
}

class ModelTwo extends ModelOne {
    static get fields() {
        return [
            { name : 'barcode', defaultValue : 'ABC123' }
        ];
    }
}
```

In previous releases, `ModelTwo` would have had to redefine the `convert` config for the `barcode` field.

## Renamed CSS themes

The `Default`, `Light` and `Dark` themes were renamed to `Classic`, `Classic-Light` and `Classic-Dark`. This change
highlights the fact that they are variations of the same theme, and that it is not the default theme (Stockholm is our
default theme since version 2.0).

If you are using one of these themes, you will have to adjust your css import to match the new name.

**Old code:**

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="build/grid.dark.css" id="bryntum-theme">
```

**New code:**

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="build/grid.classic-dark.css" id="bryntum-theme">
```

If you have theme specific selectors in your code/CSS you have to adjust those also:

**Old code:**

```css
.b-theme-dark {
/*...*/
}
```

**New code:**

```css
.b-theme-classic-dark {
/*...*/
}
```


<p class="last-modified">Last modified on 2022-05-30 6:38:15</p>