# What's new in Calendar v4.1.0

Be sure to also check out the news in [Grid](#Grid/guides/upgrades/4.1.0.md) and 
[Scheduler](#Scheduler/guides/upgrades/4.1.0.md).

## AgendaView has configurable time range

Prior to version 4.1.0, the Agenda View simply iterated existing events in the store, and created a row for each date
that had events intersecting it.

This meant that recurring events were not projected into the future in AgendaView.

From 4.1.0, Agenda View has a `range` config which may take the following values:

- `day`
- `week`
- `month`
- `year`
- `decade`

A magnitude part may also be included, eg:

```javascript
modes : {
    agenda : {
        range : '3 months'
    }
}
```

A floating button in the Agenda View allows the user to choose the range they wish to see.

## New view type `list`
A list view is a grid-based view of the events in the store showing the event fields in columns.

This view has a `range` in the same way as the Agenda View. The menu to choose the range to display is part of the header context menu.

This view is not shown by default, but will need to be configured in if required:

```javascript
    modes : {
        list : true
    }
```

## Dropped support for RequireJS

In version 4.1.0 we have removed the RequireJS demo from the project, since it is an outdated technology. 
We instead recommend using modern ES6 module imports which is supported in all modern browsers 
(Chrome, FireFox, Safari, Edge (chromium)). 

You could easily upgrade old application code to use new technology.

**Old code:**

`index.html`
```html
<script data-main="scripts/app" src="scripts/require.js"></script>
```

`scripts/app.js`

```javascript
requirejs.config({
    paths : {
        calendar : '../../../build/calendar.umd'
    }
});

requirejs(['calendar'], function(bryntum) {
    new bryntum.Calendar({
        // config here
    });
});
```

**New code:**

`index.html`
```html
<script type="module" src="scripts/app.js"></script>
```

`scripts/app.js`

```javascript
import { Calendar } from '../../../build/calendar.module.js';

new Calendar({
    // config here
});
```

## CSS encoding

Bryntum now uses [Dart SASS](https://sass-lang.com/dart-sass) to compile CSS from SCSS for the themes. It outputs CSS 
encoded with UTF-8. The encoding is specified at the top of the CSS file as a `@charset` tag:

```css
@charset "UTF-8";
```

It is important that this tag is preserved in the CSS used on page, to guarantee that font icons render as intended.

Minified CSS instead uses a byte order mark to specify encoding, which although invisible to the eye should be preserved
in the file used on page.

If you use a custom build process that includes our CSS and icons are not rendered correctly in all browsers, the issue
is most likely caused by missing encoding info. Try adding it back or serving the CSS with correct encoding specified
in the HTTP header.

## Frameworks examples

Frameworks examples were moved to **examples/frameworks** folder:

| Framework | Examples folder             |
|-----------|-----------------------------|
| Angular   | examples/frameworks/angular |
| React     | examples/frameworks/react   |
| Vue v2    | examples/frameworks/vue     |
| Vue v3    | examples/frameworks/vue-3   |


<p class="last-modified">Last modified on 2022-05-30 6:38:15</p>